---
layout: post
title: "IMO 2023 Problem 3"
date: 2023-07-31
tags: [maths]
categories: [IMO,Olympiads]
---

**Problem 3:** For each integer $$k \geqslant 2$$, determine all infinite sequences of positive integers $$a_1, a_2, \ldots$$ for which there exists a polynomial $$P$$ of the form $$P(x)=x^k+c_{k-1} x^{k-1}+\cdots+c_1 x+c_0$$, where $$c_0, c_1, \ldots, c_{k-1}$$ are non-negative integers, such that

$$P\left(a_n\right)=a_{n+1} a_{n+2} \cdots a_{n+k}$$

for every integer $$n \geqslant 1$$.
<!--more-->

**Solution 1.** The answer is all constant or ascending arithmetic sequences, i.e. $$a_n = b + (n-1)d$$ for positive integers $$b$$ and nonnegative integers $$d$$. These work since we can take $$P(x) = (x + d)(x + 2d) \cdots (x + kd)$$. Now we show that no others work.

Before we begin, we note that given $$P$$ and $$k$$ consecutive values $$a_{n}, \ldots, a_{n+k-1}$$ of the sequence, the rest of the sequence can be fully determined, since we have 
$$a_{n+k} = \frac{P(a_n)}{a_{n+1}\cdots a_{n+k-1}}$$ 
and for $$n > 1$$, $$a_{n-1} = P^{-1}(a_n\cdots a_{n+k-1})$$ (note that $$P$$ is increasing and hence injective on the positive integers). Call these two relations $$(\star)$$.

First, let's handle the special case $$P(x) = x^k$$; we aim to prove that the $$a_n$$ are constant. To see this, let $$b$$ be the minimum value attained by any $$a_n$$. Then, if $$a_n = b$$, we have that $$a_{n+1} \cdots a_{n+k} = b^k$$ but $$a_{n+i} \geq b$$ for all $$i$$; therefore $$a_{n+1} = b$$. Therefore the sequence is eventually constant at $$b$$; by applying $$(\star)$$ we get that $$a_n = b$$ for all $$n$$, as desired.

Now assume that some non-leading coefficient of $$P(x)$$ is positive. We prove a bunch of lemmas.

Lemma 1. The sequence $$(a_n)$$ achieves arbitrarily large values.
Proof. Since $$P(x) > x^k$$ for all positive integers $$x$$, we conclude that $$\max\{a_{n+1},\ldots,a_{n+k}\} > a_n$$ for all $$n$$. Iterating this proves the claim. $$\blacksquare$$

Lemma 2. For every $$m$$, there are only finitely many $$n$$ with $$a_n = m$$.
Proof. For every such $$n$$, we must have $$a_{n+1},\ldots,a_{n+k} \leq P(m)$$. Thus, if there are infinitely such $$n$$, we can find some $$n < n'$$ with $$a_{n+i} = a_{n'+i}$$ for all $$1 \leq i \leq k$$. By iterating $$(\star)$$ we get that $$a_n$$ is periodic, which contradicts Lemma 1. $$\blacksquare$$

Lemma 3. $$a_{n+1} \geq a_n$$ for all $$n$$.
Proof. Suppose not. Let $$m$$ be the minimum value such that there exists an $$n$$ such that $$a_n > a_{n+1} = m$$. But then,
$$1 > \frac{P(a_{n+1})}{P(a_n)} = \frac{a_{n+k+1}}{a_{n+1}},$$ so $$a_{n+k+1} < a_{n+1}$$. Thus, if we let 
$$m' = \min \{a_{n+2},\ldots,a_{n+k+1}\},$$
 which must be less than $$m$$, and $$n'$$ be the minimal $$n+2 \leq n' \leq n+k+1$$ with $$a_{n'} = m'$$, we find that $$a_{n'-1} > a_{n'} = m'$$, contradicting the minimality of $$m$$. $$\blacksquare$$

Lemma 4. $$a_{n+1} - a_n = O(1)$$
Proof. By Lemma 3, $$a_{n+1}^k \leq a_{n+1} \cdots a_{n+k} = P(a_n)$$, so $$a_{n+1} - a_n \leq P(a_n)^{1/k} - a_n$$. But this is bounded above. $$\blacksquare$$

By Lemma 4, there are now finitely many possibilities for the tuple $$(a_{n+1} - a_n, a_{n+2}-a_n,\ldots,a_{n+k+1} - a_n)$$, so there must be one, call it $$(d_1,\ldots,d_{k+1})$$, which appears infinitely many times. Then we must have
$$P(a_n) = (a_n + d_1) \cdots (a_n + d_k) \text{ and } P(a_n+d_1) = (a_n+d_2)\cdots (a_n + d_{k+1})$$for infinitely many $$n$$. By Lemma 2, this means that
$$P(x) = (x + d_1) \cdots (x + d_k) \text{ and } P(x+d_1) = (x+d_2)\cdots (x + d_{k+1})$$for infinitely many $$x$$, meaning that the relations above have to hold as polynomials. Now, by Lemma 3 we have $$d_1 \leq \cdots \leq d_{k+1}$$. Moreover, since a polynomial can be factored into linear factors in only one way, we conclude that $$d_i = d_{i+1} - d_i$$ for all $$1 \leq i \leq k$$, i.e. $$d_i = id_1$$ for all $$i$$. As a result, $$P(x) = (x + d_1)\cdots(x + kd_1)$$, and there exists an $$n$$ with $$a_{n+i} = a_n + id_1$$ for all $$0 \leq i \leq k+1$$. By iterating $$(\star)$$ forwards, we get that there exists an integer $$b$$ with $$a_n = b +  (n-1)d_1$$ for all large $$n$$. If $$b > 0$$, we can iterate $$(\star)$$ backwards and conclude. Otherwise, we can iterate $$(\star)$$ backwards to get some $$n > 1$$ with $$a_n \leq d_1$$. But then $$a_n \cdots a_{n+k-1} < P(1)$$, so there is no possibility for $$a_{n-1}$$. So we are done in this case as well. $$\square$$

**Solution 2.** The answer is all non-decreasing arithmetic sequences, i.e. $$a_n=b+(n-1)d$$ for a positive integer $$b$$ and a nonnegative integer $$d$$. Clearly those work since we can choose
$$P(x)=\prod_{i=1}^k(x+id).$$
The main claim is as follows.

Claim 1. $$a_n\le a_{n+1}$$ for all positive integers $$n$$.
Proof. Suppose not. Pick positive integers $$m,n$$ such that $$a_n>a_{n+1}=m$$ and $$m$$ is minimal. As $$c_{k-1},\ldots,c_0$$ are all nonnegative, the polynomial $$P(x)$$ is strictly increasing over positive integers so
$$1>\frac{P(a_{n+1})}{P(a_n)}=\frac{a_{n+k+1}}{a_{n+1}}.$$It follows that $$m=a_{n+1}>a_{n+k+1}$$. Let $$n'\in[n+1,n+k]$$ is the maximal integer such that $$a_{n'}\ge m$$ and let $$m'=a_{n'+1}$$. then $$m'<m$$ and $$a_{n'}>a_{n'+1}=m'$$, contradiction to the minimality of $$m$$. $$\square$$

Now we divide into cases.
Case 1. The sequence $$\{a_n\}$$ is bounded. Since $$\{a_n\}$$ is weakly increasing, then it is eventually constant, so there exists $$t,c\in\mathbb N$$ such that
$$a_n=c$$ for all $$n\ge t$$. Then we have
$$c^k\le P(c)=P(a_t)=\prod_{i=1}^k P(a_{t+i})=c^k.$$Since equality holds we have $$c_{k-1}=\dots=c_0=0$$ so $$P(x)=x^k$$. From backwards induction it follows that $$P(t-j)=c$$ for all $$1\le j\le t-1$$. Hence $$\{a_n\}_{n\in\mathbb N}$$ is constant.
Case 2. $$\{a_n\}$$ is unbounded. Let $$c\doteqdot\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}c_i$$. Observe that for every positive integer $$n$$ we have
$$P(n)\le n^k+cn^{k-1}=(n+c)n^{k-1}$$Thus, for every positive integer $$n$$,
$$(a_n+c)a_n^{k-1}\ge P(a_n)=\prod_{i=1}^ka_{n+i}\ge a_{n+k}a_n^{k-1}.$$Hence $$a_{n+k}\le a_n+c$$.

Claim 2. Let $$e_1,e_2,\ldots,e_k$$ be nonnegative integers such that there exist infinitely positive integers $$n$$ for which $$a_{n+i}-a_n=e_i$$ for all integer $$i\in[1,n]$$. Then $$P(x)=\prod_{i=1}^n (x+e_i)$$.
Proof. By assumption, there exists an infinite subset $$X\subset\mathbb N$$ such that
$$(a_{n+1}-a_n,a_{n+2}-a_n,\ldots,a_{n+k}-a_n)=(e_1,\ldots,e_k)$$for every $$n\in X$$. Then for every $$n\in X$$ we have
$$P(a_n)=\prod_{i=1}^k a_{n+i}=\prod_{i=1}^k (a_n+e_i).$$Hence the equation $$P(x)=\prod_{i=1}^n (x+e_i)$$ has a solution set $$\{a_n\mid n\in X\}$$. Moreover, as $$\{a_n\}_{n\in\mathbb N}$$ is nondecreasing and unbounded, the set $$\{a_n\mid n\in X\}$$ is unbounded as well, so $$P(x)=\prod_{i=1}^n (x+e_i)$$ in $$\mathbb Z[x]$$. $$\square$$

Claim 3. Let $$d$$ be a nonnegative integer such that there exist infinitely many positive integers $$n$$ for which $$a_{n+1}-a_n=d$$. Then $$d$$ is the smallest nonnegative integer such that $$P(-d)=0$$.
Proof. By assumption, there exists an infinite subset $$X\subset\mathbb N$$ such that $$a_{n+1}-a_n=d$$ for every $$n\in X$$. Define a function $$f\colon X\to\mathbb Z_{\ge 0}^k$$ by
$$f(n)\doteqdot (a_{n+1}-a_n,a_{n+2}-a_n,\ldots,a_{n+k}-a_n).$$As $$a_{n+i}-a_n\le c$$ for all $$n\in X$$ and $$i\in[1,k]$$, the image of $$f$$ is finite. Hence by pigeonhole, there exists an infinite subset $$Y\subset X$$ and nonnegative integers $$e_1,e_2,\ldots,e_k$$ such that $$f(n)=(e_1,\ldots,e_k)$$ for every $$n\in Y$$. By claim 2 we have $$P(x)=\prod_{i=1}^n (x+e_i)$$. As $$d=e_1\le e_2\ldots\le e_k$$, the number $$d$$ is the smallest with property $$P(-d)=0$$. $$\square$$

Now define $$d_n\doteqdot a_{n+1}-a_n$$ for each positive integer $$n$$. As $$0\le d_n\le c$$, the sequence $$\{d_n\}_{n\in\mathbb N}$$ is bounded, so there exists a nonnegative integer $$d$$ which occurs infinitely many in $$\{d_n\}_{n\in\mathbb N}$$. By claim 3, $$d$$ is unique so by boundness again, the sequence $$\{d_n\}_{n\in\mathbb N}$$ is eventually constant with value $$d$$. Formally, there exists a positive integer $$m$$ such that $$d_n=d$$ for all $$n\ge m$$. Pick such a minimal $$m$$. If $$m=1$$ then we are done, so assume $$m\ge 2$$ for contrary. Claim 2 implies that $$P(x)=\prod_{i=1}^k(x+id)$$. Let $$Q(x)\doteqdot \prod_{i=1}^k(x+(i-1)d)$$, hence $$P(x)=Q(x+d)$$. By hypothesis we have
$$Q(a_{m-1}+d)=P(a_{m-1})=\prod_{i=1}^k a_{m-1+i}=\prod_{i=1}^k(a_m+(i-1)d)=Q(a_m).$$As the polynomial $$Q(x)$$ is strictly increasing over positive integers, we have $$a_{m-1}+d=a_m$$ or $$d_{m-1}=d$$, contradiction.
To summarize, in both cases we have proved that $$a_1,a_2,\ldots$$ is an arithmetic nondecreasing sequence, hence we are done.

**Solution 3.** The answer is nondecreasing arithmetic sequences only. These work, since if the common difference is $$d$$, we can write the polynomial $$(x+d)\ldots(x+kd)$$. We now prove that they are the only ones.

First, if all the $$c_i$$ are zeroes, we may pick some prime $$p \mid a_1$$ and examine the $$p$$-adic valuation of the sequence, which satisfies $$k\nu_p(a_n)=\nu_p(a_{n+1})+\cdots+\nu_p(a_{n+k})$$. Since these should all be nonnegative integers, pick $$n$$ with $$\nu_p(a_n)$$ minimal; then $$\nu_p(a_{n+1}),\ldots$$ are all minimal by induction, so working backwards we find that $$\nu_p(a_{n-1}),\nu_p(a_{n-2}),\ldots$$ are all minimal by induction as well, i.e. the sequence is constant. Thus suppose at least one of the $$c_i$$ is positive.

Claim 1: There does not exist a constant $$C$$ such that we can find arbitrarily large $$n$$ with 

$$a_{n+1},\ldots,a_{n+k} \leq C.$$

Proof: For every $$n$$ there exists some $$1 \leq i \leq k$$ such that $$a_{n+i}>a_n$$, else $$P(a_n)\leq a_n^k$$. Then, we can essentially repeat this to find some $$a_m>C$$, and then repeat it more to get some sequence of terms separated by distance at most $$k$$, all exceeding $$C$$. $$\blacksquare$$

Claim 2: There does not exist a constant $$C$$ such that we can find arbitrarily large $$n$$ with $$a_n \leq C$$, i.e. every term in the sequence occurs finitely many times.
Proof: If such a $$C$$ exists, pick $$n$$ large with $$a_n \leq C$$. By claim $$1$$, we can find some $$1 \leq i \leq k$$ such that $$a_{n+i}$$ is massive, which is a contradiction by taking $$a_{n+i}>P(C)$$. $$\blacksquare$$

The second claim allows us to find infinitely many $$n$$ such that $$a_n<a_{n+1},a_{n+2},\ldots$$; call such $$n$$ endangered. Clearly, $$a_n$$ across $$n$$ endangered can grow arbitrarily large.

For every endangered $$n$$, consider the differences $$a_{n+1}-a_n,\ldots,a_{n+k}-a_n$$, which must be at least one. On the other hand, if $$a_n$$ is sufficiently large, they must be at most $$100c_{k-1}+100$$, so they are all bounded in some interval. Therefore, by Pigeonhole, some multiset of differences $$\{d_1,\ldots,d_k\}:=S$$ with $$0<d_1\leq \cdots \leq d_k$$ must occur infinitely many times. Writing the RHS as a polynomial in $$a_n$$, we get that

$$P(a_n)=(a_n+d_1)\ldots(a_n+d_k)$$

for infinitely many choices of $$a_n$$, hence this equality must hold in the polynomial sense.

Now we consider $$a_{n+1}$$, where $$n$$ is endangered and $$\{a_{n+1}-a_n,\ldots,a_{n+k}-a_n\}=S$$. Let $$\{a_{n+2}-a_{n+1},\ldots,a_{n+k}-a_{n+1},a_{n+k+1}-a_{n+1}\}=S'$$ (both sides are multisets), where $$d_1' \leq \cdots \leq d_k'$$. The elements $$a_{n+2}-a_{n+1},\ldots,a_{n+k}-a_{n+1}$$ are bounded (in both directions), since they are in $$S-S$$, hence for $$a_{n+1}$$ sufficiently large, $$a_{n+k+1}-a_{n+1}$$ must be bounded in both directions as well, otherwise we get a size contradiction. Therefore by Pigeonhole some choice of differences $$\{d_1',\ldots,d_k'\}:=S'$$ appears infinitely many times, for infinitely many $$a_{n+1}$$ (since $$a_{n+1}>a_n$$ grows arbitrarily large), so we get that $$P(a_{n+1})=(a_{n+1}+d_1')\ldots(a_{n+1}+d_k')$$ holds infinitely many times, hence it must be a polynomial equality. But since polynomials have unique factorizations, it follows that $$S=S'$$. It is then clear that $$a_{n+1}-a_n=d_1$$, since otherwise $$S' \ni d_1-(a_{n+1}-a_n)\leq 0$$, but $$S$$ contains only positive integers. From here, we find that $$d_2-d_1=d_1'$$, since if it is less then it can't be in $$S'$$ and if it is more then there is no way we can find $$d_1'$$ in $$S-d_1$$, and by induction we have $$d_3-d_1=d_2'$$ and so on, until $$d_k-d_1=d_{k-1}'$$, implying that $$a_{n+k+1}-a_{n+1}=d_k'$$. This actually implies that $$d_i=id_1$$ for all $$1 \leq i \leq k$$.

Let $$d=d_1$$ for convenience. We will perform a "parallel" induction on the two conditions:

$$\{a_{m+1},\ldots,a_{m+k}\}=\{a_m+d,\ldots,a_m+kd\}$$

$$a_{m+1}=a_m+d$$

For $$m=n$$, where $$n$$ is endangered, we just proved that these two conditions are true. Pick $$n$$ to be large enough as a base case.
Now, if the two conditions are true for $$m$$, since $$a_{m+1}=a_m+d$$ by hypothesis, we have
$$\{a_{m+2},\ldots,a_{m+k}\}=\{a_m+2d,\ldots,a_m+kd\}=\{a_{m+1}+d,\ldots,a_{m+1}+(k-1)d\}.$$By dividing out both sides of the given equation by $$a_{m+2}\ldots a_{m+k}$$, it follows that $$a_{m+k+1}=a_{m+1}+kd,$$ so the first condition is true for $$m+1$$. Let $$a_{m+2}=a_{m+1}+id$$, so then

$$\{a_{m+3},\ldots,a_{m+k+1}\}=\{a_{m+1}+(1-i)d,\ldots,a_{m+1}+(-1)d,a_{m+1}+d,\ldots,a_{m+1}+(k-i)d\}.$$ 

If $$i \geq 2$$, then $$a_{m+1}-d$$ is actually in the above set. But by the Euclidean algorithm, since $$d$$ is not a root of $$P$$, we can write $$P(x)=(x-d)Q(x)+R(x)$$ where $$R$$ is a nonzero constant polynomial (not dependent on $$n,m$$), so then for $$a_{m+1}$$ large, $$\tfrac{P(a_{m+1})}{a_{m+1}-d}$$ cannot be an integer, but the product of all the other elements in the above set is clearly integral: contradiction. Hence $$i=1$$, so $$a_{m+2}=a_{m+1}+d$$, completing the induction.

It now follows that the sequence $$a_1,a_2,\ldots$$ is eventually arithmetic (with common difference $$d$$). On the other hand, since the coefficients of $$P$$ are all nonnegative, and at least one is positive, it is strictly increasing in $$\mathbb{R}^+$$. Therefore, given $$a_{n+1},\ldots,a_{n+k}$$, there is exactly one possible choice for $$a_n$$ (which is not necessarily an integer). On the other hand, if $$(a_{n+1},\ldots,a_{n+k})=(a+d,\ldots,a+kd)$$, then it is clear that setting $$a_n=a$$ will work, so we must have $$a_n=a$$. Therefore, by inducting "downwards", with base case $$m=n$$ and inductive step $$m \to m-1$$, it follows that the entire sequence is an arithmetic progression with common difference $$d$$, finishing the problem. $$\blacksquare$$

<div style="text-align:right;"> <a href="https://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c6t390457f6h3106754_imo_2023_p3" target="_blank"> Source.</a></div>

<div class="fb-comments" data-href="https://hoangnamphan.github.io/blog/imo-2023-p3" data-width="300" data-numposts="10"></div>

